---
title: "Animal-Robot Interaction Task to Examine Spatial Planning as it Occurs in Nature"
collection: talks
type: "Presentation"
permalink: 
venue: "Northwestern"
date: 2023-03-02
location: "Evanston IL, USA"
---

A presentation focusing on the development of an animal-robot interaction task, with a particular emphasis on the robot design and control.

## Video 
<div style="text-align:center; transform: scale(1.0);margin-bottom: 40px;">
    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PpGYyq2HbUY?si=9uVg2e-_saBEMzkW" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>


## Animal-Robot Interaction Task to Examine Spatial Planning as it Occurs in Nature

### 1 Introduction

Planning is the ability to forward simulate and evaluate possible future actions before making a decision. For mammalian and avian species, there are certain environments and circumstances where plan-based decision-making offers a significant advantage over the simpler but inflexible approach of habit-based decision-making [4]. For example, mammals like big cats engage in lengthy pursuit strategies involving stealth, picking paths where they anticipate they will not be seen given the future location of their moving quarry. This study seeks to uncover and investigate overt animal behaviors indicative of plan-based action selection in a naturalistic task. 

Previous investigations into planning behavior and its neurophysiology have offered great insights into this cognitive ability. These include brain regions associated with planning and behaviors indicative of planning [4,6,7]. However, the exploration has been limited to artificial laboratory tasks, like T-choice experiments with limited choice points (nodes) and stationary rewards. These tasks are too simplistic and lead to an eventual shift to habit-based action selection [4, 7, 8].

Our lab previously developed a computational simulation to investigate visually guided predator-prey interactions [4]. This task is a more complex, dynamic, and ecologically relevant behavioral task. In this simulation, a prey agent used a tree search algorithm to model plan-based action selection in 2-D environments to reach a goal and avoid a dynamic predator. This work revealed a selective benefit for planning in savanna-like environments.

This computational work helped our lab determine the ideal ecological context to move beyond reductive platforms towards a real-world task that is more representative of the animal’s natural habitat and is dynamic enough to elicit planning. The focus of this abstract is twofold: develop a naturalistic and dynamic behavioral task for mice
using a custom autonomous robot (termed Pufferbot) as a predator, and characterize specific overt behaviors that may be indicative of naturalistic planning.

### 2 Materials and Methods

#### 2.1 Experimental Setup

Our lab designed and constructed an experimental platform consisting of a large hexagonal arena 2.34 meters across, vertex to vertex. The space is discretized into 331 hexagonal cells, each 12.7 cm across. The habitat has magnetic
obstacles that can be arranged in different configurations to emulate various environmental structures. There are four high-speed cameras above the habitat that are used to track the position of either agent, mouse or robot, at 90 Hz.

#### 2.3 Custom robot: Pufferbot
Due to the specific design and experimental requirements, the predator robot used in the experiment was custom-built. The differential drive robot is powered by the ESP-WROOM-32 Module and is driven by two geared DC motors with magnetic encoders. The robot is also equipped with three LEDs for detection and localization via
the camera sensors. Additionally, the robot predator is equipped with a custom air puff mechanism that dispenses a burst of air when triggered for negative reinforcement and to elicit fear in the mice. The robot houses two custom PCBs. One provides the supporting circuitry for the microcontroller and the motor drivers, and the other powers the LEDs and components used for the puff mechanism.

#### 2.2 Experimental Task
The animal’s task for each episode is to traverse the habitat and reach a reward without capture. An aversive air puff delineates a “capture” from the Pufferbot. The puff is triggered if the distance between the Pufferbot and the subject
falls below 2.5 cells (27.5 cm). Progression through the arena is controlled by automated doors that actuate when the mouse completes an episode by reaching the reward.

#### 2.3 Robot Behavior
The robot predator starts each episode at a spawn cell: a cell not visible to the prey, in a region of the arena (1/3 of
the total area) furthest from the door through which the mouse enters. During an episode, the robot has two states: if
the mouse is visible to the robot it aggressively pursues the prey; otherwise, the robot explores the world.

#### 2.4 Robot Control
The robot is fully autonomous to allow for repeatable and unbiased experimental results. The robot is designed to
follow intermediate waypoints that make up a trajectory, created by an A* search algorithm [1], that leads to a
specified destination.

The controller is essentially a hybrid of P and PID control, where PID is used to regulate the heading of the
robot, and a P-controller is used to correct along-track error (distance from target). This hybrid controller outputs the
desired left and right wheel velocity for the differential drive mobile robot. This data is sent via wifi to the
microcontroller, where a PD controller is used for motor speed control. The camera sensors mounted above the arena
provide feedback about the robot state (used by the higher-level controller for motion planning), and the encoders
are used for the speed control feedback (used by the lower-level motor controller).


An algorithm inspired by the formula governing the gravitational force between two objects augments
obstacle avoidance during motion planning. This algorithm repels the robot from occlusions by perturbing the
desired heading angle of the robot, where the distance between the objects largely influences the magnitude of the
perturbation.
### 3 Results
The development of the robotic predator was an iterative process. The robot had to meet many design constraints:
size, speed, and sensor restrictions. Additionally, the robot had to elicit a fear response in the mice to emulate the
presence of a dynamic threat while meeting the safety regulations of NU Animal Care and Use Committee. Initially,
the robot was designed to be small and quick to match the speed ratio found between predator and prey in terrestrial
environments [4]. This initial design was inspired by the robots used in Half-Size Micromouse competitions.
However, this small robot did not elicit a fear response in mice. Further iterations involved integrating an aversive
stimulus into the chassis of the robot. The most effective solution was a custom air puff mechanism. Further issues
were encountered, like stability and motor control issues, due to the size constraint and increased payload.
Eventually, an optimized design was deployed, and thousands of trials have been collected from the arena with the
robotic predator.


The experimental protocol includes experiments with and without the robot in the same world
configuration. In experiments with the robot, path rerouting upon line of sight of the robot was found, as opposed to
experiments with no robot where the mice tend to repeat the same route. This observation suggests that the current
robot induces fear in the mice and encourages flexible behavior. Additionally, a unique behavior, peeking, has been
observed and increases in frequency during robot exposure. This behavior might suggest information sampling for
belief state collapse to inform periods of deliberation associated with planning [7].
### 4 Conclusion and Future Work

This abstract introduced a novel animal-robot interaction platform to investigate animal behavior during an
ecologically relevant task. Experimental investigations have uncovered various behaviors and strategies deployed by
the mice, like rerouting and peeking, that may indicate plan-based decision-making. Future work will include
uncovering how neural systems subserve these behaviors. This work may consist of neural recordings and inhibiting
brain regions associated with planning during the task.

My future work will diverge from the neurophysiology investigation. The preliminary idea is to investigate
the potential of collaborative planning in animals that show evidence of complex and intelligent behaviors during
collective tasks, like cooperative hunting. Interestingly, there are a surprising number of examples where intelligent
animals hunt collaboratively in environments that are suggested to offer no advantage for planning [4], like dolphins
in open water. I hypothesize that these animals work together to manipulate the structure of the environment to
fabricate the necessary conditions for planning to be successful. Additionally, I am interested in the roles of
individuals and communication during complex collaborative behavior. This investigation could offer insight into
strategies for developing more intelligent cooperative, multi-agent robotic systems.

### References
1. P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum
Cost Paths,” IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics, vol. 4, pp. 100–107, July 1968.  
Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics.  
2. R. Mayet, J. Roberz, T. Schmickl, and K. Crailsheim, “Antbots: A Feasible Visual Emulation of
Pheromone Trails for Swarm Robots,” Swarm Intelligence, pp. 84–94, 2010.  
3. M. A. MacIver, “Neuroethology: From morphological computation to planning,” in The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition (P. Robbins and M. Aydede, eds.), pp. 480–504, New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.  
4. U. Mugan and M. A. MacIver, “Spatial planning with long visual range benefits escape from visual
predators in complex naturalistic environments,” Nature Communications, vol. 11, p. 3057, June 2020.
Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
5. C. R. Craig, “Implementation of the Pure Pursuit Path Tracking Algorithm,” Technical Report
CMU-RI-TR-92-01. Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 1992.  
6. L. T. Hunt, et al, “Formalizing Planning and Information Search in Naturalistic Decision-Making,” Nature
neuroscience, vol. 24, pp.1051–1064, 2021.  
7. A. D. Redish, “Vicarious Trial and Error,” Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 147–59, 2016.  
8. K. S. Smith and A. M. Graybiel, “A Dual Operator View of Habitual Behavior Reflecting Cortical and
Striatal Dynamics,” Neuron (Cambridge, Mass.), vol. 79, no. 3, p.608, 2013.